in this presentation we will study about
the sequential circuits a very very
important presentation in the digital
electronics course because this is the
base for your flip-flops counters and it
registers all these three topics very
important and there are so many
questions being asked from these three
topics only so if you want to master
these three topics you have to
understand what is sequential circuits
first that we will study in this
presentation only there is also a small
change that you will find in the coming
videos and this presentation is the
lecture number I am mentioning the
lecture number like this is 118 flexure
in the digital electronics course this
will help the students who are learning
the digital electronics first time okay
so let's move to the sequential circuits
what it is when we talk about the
sequential circuit it becomes important
for us to talk about the combinational
circuits at the same time okay because
half of the definition of the sequential
circuit is the combinational circuit
let's see how this is a formal
definition for your sequential circuit
you can use this definition if someone
asks you what a sequential circuit in
your exams as well so in sequential
circuits the present output okay the
first important thing is the present
output depends upon the present input
okay now this two things when combined
together makes your combinational
circuit in combinational circuit the
present output depends only on the
present input okay we have to use word
only here for the combinational circuit
because if I say I am having a
combinational circuit that takes two
input the first input is let us say 1
and the second input is also 1 and the
combinational circuit here here adds
this two numbers so 1 plus 1 gives you
zero as the some and one is the carry
okay so this is the result that we are
having again you are using this same
same adder and you want to add zero and
one then the result will be what one
zero it has nothing to do with this
output okay what was the previous output
let me explain you once more you are
adding one one okay so you are getting
the result 0 1 this is your output okay
now again you are adding different
number let's say 0 1 then the output is
1 0 now this output this is your present
output that we are talking about this
present output is only depending upon
this present input this is your present
input this one is your past input and
this one is your past output fine so
this output the present output has
nothing to do with the past input or the
past output does we call it as the
combinational circuit ok I hope you are
getting this but in case of sequential
circuit the present output depends upon
the present input as well as as well as
it depends upon the past output or
outputs okay like in this case we are
having two outputs so it depends upon
the past output or outputs as well so
this is the major difference between
your sequential circuit and the
combinational circuit let's see how it
works for example this is my
combinational circuit this is my input
present input and this is my present
output so the present output depends
only on the present input now if I say I
want to convert this combinational
circuit to the sequential circuit then
what I have to do let's see I have to
take this output there are all the three
outputs actually and then store it I
have to store it now let me explain you
why I need to store it counter is the
sequential circuit and you
already know that how counter works
let's say if it is a decimal counter it
comes from zero to nine every time it
adds one to zero then we will get one
then again it adds 1 to 1 we get 2 then
2 plus 1 3 then 4 5 6 7 8 9 so every
time it is adding adding 1 to the
previous output because 0 plus 1 gives
us 1 now when you add 1 to 1 we must
know that this one was the previous
output because until and unless you know
what was the previous output how we are
going to add 1 for example if I'm at 5
then the counter will count 6 it will
count 6 only if it knows that the
previous output was 5 until and unless
it knows what was the previous output
how it is going to add 1 so we require
to store we require to store previous
output this is the very important point
in the sequential circuit we require to
store the previous output so what we
need we need a memory ok so what I am
actually doing here I am giving inputs I
am getting the output and also at the
same time and storing that particular
output on outputs in my memory block we
will talk about this memory very
important point this memory will keep
the output till the time I am again
going to use it let's say time came and
we have to use the values stored in this
memory and this values will be used as
the inputs so let's see what we got here
we are having 3 inputs and these are our
present input then we are having the
output and also we are having the memory
element which has already stored the
output from the previous inputs so this
will become our past output and this
past output will go
the input and you can call it as the
feedback will go as the feedback and the
present output will depend upon this
present input and the past output so
this is our sequential circuit now let
me explain you the important point
what is this memory okay because in
sequential circuit everything is
combinational you can see everything is
combinational except this memory and the
feedback so we have to focus on this
memory that what is this memory and how
we are going to store the output and as
we are in the digital world the output
will be 0 or 1 bits you can say so we
have to store the bits how we are going
to do that if we know how to store a
single bit we later can store multi bits
also so the first thing that came in the
mind of the people is to use cascaded
not gate okay before that let me tell
you this memory is nothing but your
flip-flops okay I have raised the
curtains the suspense is over this
memory is your flip-flops okay but
people didn't get to the flip-flops
directly but they have thought different
methods to store a single bit number
earlier it was the Cascade it not gate
arrangement that can be used to store a
single bit okay let's see how these are
your two not gates and if the input is
one or high the output of your first not
gate is 0 and then the output of a
second not gate is 1 so you can see that
this one is stored